ACRONYMS
CI/CD Continuous Integration/
Continuous Delivery
CoSQ Cost of Software Quality
COTS Commercial Off-The-Shelf
FMEA Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
FTA Fault Tree Analysis
IV&V Independent Verification and
Validation
PDCA Plan-Do-Check-Act
PSP Personal Software Process
QFD Quality Function Deployment
RCA Root Cause Analysis
SCM Software Configuration
Management
SQA Software Quality Assurance
SQAP Software Quality Assurance Plan
SQC Software Quality Control
SQM Software Quality Management
V&V Verification and Validation
INTRODUCTION
What is software quality, and why is it so
important that it is included in many knowledge
areas (KAs) of the SWEBOK Guide? One
reason is that the term software quality is overloaded.
Software quality may refer to the desirable
characteristics of software products, to the
extent to which a particular software product
has those characteristics (software product
quality), and to the processes, tools and techniques
used to achieve those characteristics
(software process quality). Over the years,
authors and organizations have defined the term
quality differently. Phil Crosby defined quality
as “conformance to requirements” [2]. Watts
Humphrey referred to it as “achieving excellent
levels of “fitness for use” [3]. Meanwhile, IBM
coined the phrase “market-driven quality,”
where the “customer is the final arbiter” [4].
Finally, fitness for purpose is also a term that
refers to software qualit. Fitness for purpose is
the suitability of a product, system, or service
for use by the intended users, for the intended
use, in the intended situations, and intended
environmental conditions.
More recently, software (product) quality
has been defined as the “capability of a software
product to satisfy stated and implied
needs under specified conditions” [4] and as
“the degree to which a software product meets
established requirements; however, quality
depends upon the degree to which those
established requirements accurately represent
stakeholder needs, wants, and expectations”
[6]. Both definitions embrace the premise of
conformance to requirements. Neither refers
to different types of requirements (requirements
categorized according to functionality,
reliability, performance, dependability, or any
other characteristic). Significantly, however,
these definitions emphasize that quality is an
important characteristic of requirements.
These definitions also illustrate another
reason for the recurring discussions about software
quality throughout the SWEBOK Guide
— the often-unclear distinction between
software quality and software quality requirements
(“the -ilities” is a common shorthand
for these terms). Software quality requirements
(Quality of Service Constraints in the
Software Requirements KA) are attributes of
(or constraints on) functional requirements
(what the system does). Software requirements
12-2 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
may also specify resource use, a communication
protocol, or many other characteristics
(Technology Constraints in the Software
Requirements KA). This KA attempts to
clarify requirements by using software quality
in the broadest sense from the definitions
above and by using software quality requirements
as constraints on functional requirements.
Software product quality is achieved
by conforming to all requirements regardless
of specified characteristics or grouping or
naming of requirements.
Software quality is also discussed in many
other SWEBOK Guide Knowledge Areas
because it is a basic concept of a software engineering
effort. The primary goal for all engineered
products is to deliver maximum stakeholder
value while balancing the constraints of development,
maintenance, and operational cost, sometimes
characterized as fitness for use. Stakeholder
value is expressed in requirements. For software
products, stakeholders could value price (what
they pay for the product), lead time (how fast
they get the product), and software quality. (See
the Software Requirements KA for a broader
discussion of this.)
The software process quality aspect,
which is implied by the above, must be made
explicit. The quality of a software process can
be also observed in process characteristics
such as efficiency, effectiveness, usability, and
learnability. Defects in that process will likely
show up as defects in the resulting software
product, as well.
Finally, the Agile and DevOps movements
aim at improving the software process
and product quality through compliance
by promoting quick iteration feedback loops
and eliminating organizational silos by collocating
users and software engineers. Other
practices like pair programming and the automation
of development, testing, and operations
services also bring value, improve
efficiency, and can detect defects early. (Refer
to the Process KA for Agile life cycles and the
Software Operations KA for more information
on DevOps processes.)
This KA provides an overview of practices,
tools, and techniques for understanding software
quality and planning and appraising
the state of software quality during development,
maintenance and operation, from both
a software product perspective and a software
process perspective. Cited references provide
additional details.
BREAKDOWN OF TOPICS FOR
SOFTWARE QUALITY
The breakdown of topics for the Software
Quality KA is presented in Figure 12.1.
Software Quality
Software Quality
Fundamentals
Software Quality
Management Process
Software Quality
Assurance Process
Software Quality
Tools
Software
Engineering Culture
and Ethics
Value and Cost
of Quality
Standards, Models
and Certifications
Software
Dependability and
Integrity Levels
Software Quality
Improvement
Plan Quality
Management
Evaluate Quality
Management
Perform corrective
and Preventive Action
Prepare for Quality
Assurance
Perform Process
Assurance
Perform Product
Assurance
Figure 12.1. Breakdown of Topics for Software Quality
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-3
1. Software Quality Fundamentals
Agreeing on what constitutes software quality
for all stakeholders and communicating that
agreement to software engineers requires
that the many aspects of quality be formally
defined and communicated. The main challenges
the software engineer faces to ensure
quality include the following:
• Difficulty in clearly defining requirements;
• Maintaining effective communication
with the client/user;
• Deviations from specifications;
• Architecture and design errors;
• Coding errors;
• Noncompliance with current processes/
procedures;
• Inadequate work product reviews and tests;
• Documentation errors.
Software quality is defined as “conformance
to established requirements; the capability
of a software product to satisfy stated
and implied needs when under specified conditions”
[6]. It is further defined “by the degree
to which a software product meets established
requirements; however, quality depends upon
the degree to which those established requirements
accurately represent stakeholder needs,
wants, and expectations” [6]. Quality often
means the absence of defects. The word defect
is overloaded with too many meanings, as
engineers and others use the word to refer
to all different types of anomalies. However,
different engineering cultures and standards
often understand “defect” and other terms
as having more specific meanings. To avoid
confusion, software engineers should use the
meaning provided by their standards [14]:
• Error: “A human action that produces an
incorrect result.” Also called human error;
• Defect: (synonym of a fault) An “imperfection
or deficiency in a work product
where that work product does not meet its
requirements or specifications and needs
to be either repaired or replaced.” A defect
is inserted when a person developing the
software makes an error. It hides in the
software until (and if) it is discovered;
• Failure: The “termination of the ability of
a system to perform a required function
or its inability to perform within previously
specified limits; an externally visible
deviation from the system’s specification
event in which a system or system component
does not perform a required function
within specified limits.” A failure is produced
when the software executes a defect.
A software engineer should understand
software quality concepts, characteristics, and
values and their application to the many development,
maintenance, and operation activities.
An important concept is that the software
requirements are expected to define the required
software quality attributes. Furthermore, software
requirements influence the measurement
methods and acceptance criteria for assessing
how the software and related work products
achieve the desired quality levels. Another
important concept is that software quality
should be planned early and assessed at many
milestones during the software life cycle.
Finally, how to adapt software quality assurance
(SQA) activities to accommodate different
life cycles, for example Agile software development
is presented in detail in the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Standard 730:2014 [6].
1.1. Software Engineering Culture and Ethics
[1*, c1s1.6; c2s3] [5*]
An organization’s culture affects how software
engineers influence software quality.
As Iberle explains [19], software engineering
practices vary depending on the business
model (e.g., custom, mass-market, commercial,
firmware) and the industry where the
software engineers work. Software engineers
are expected to share a commitment to software
quality in the context of their industry
and as part of their culture. A healthy software
engineering culture includes many characteristics,
such as the understanding that
trade-offs among cost, schedule and quality
12-4 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
are a basic tenet of any product’s engineering.
A strong software engineering ethic assumes
that engineers accurately report information,
conditions and outcomes related to quality.
Ethics also play a significant role in software
quality in the professional culture of
engineering, and in the attitudes of software
engineers. The IEEE Computer Society and
the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) have developed a code of ethics and
professional practice. (See Codes of Ethics
and Professional Conduct in the Software
Engineering Professional Practice KA.)
1.2. Value and Costs of Quality [1*, c2s2.2]
One major factor driving resistance to implementing
SQA is its perceived high cost.
However, not implementing basic SQA activities
can be costly as well. Software engineers
should inform their administration of the risks
they take when they are not fully committed to
quality. This can be done by explaining the cost
of software quality concepts to management.
Cost of software quality (CoSQ) is defined as
the sum of the following project costs:
• Implementation cost of planning and
construction activities (e.g., planning,
designing, development);
• Prevention cost of activities (process
improvement, tools, training);
• Appraisal costs activities for defect detection
(e.g., reviews, audits, testing);
• Nonconformance and rework costs
(internal failure cost and external
failure cost).
The CoSQ can be broken down into two
top-level categories: conformance cost and nonconformance
cost. Conformance cost is the total
of all investments in error and defect detection
(appraisal) and prevention activities.
Appraisal costs arise from project activities
that are intended to find errors and defects.
These include testing (as detailed in the
Software Testing KA) and reviews and audits
(as detailed later in this KA). Appraisal costs
extend to subcontracted software suppliers, if
any. Prevention costs include investments in
software process improvement (SPI) efforts,
quality infrastructure, quality tools, work
product templates and training. These costs
might not be specific to a project; they often
span the larger organization.
Nonconformance cost is the total of all
spending dealing with errors and defects that
have been detected. Pre-delivery costs are
those incurred to repair errors and defects
found during appraisal activities and discovered
before the software product is delivered
to the customer. Post-Delivery costs include
those incurred responding to software failures
discovered after delivery to the customer.
External costs include the rework needed to
repair and test an updated release. External
costs include rework and repair of the unintended
and uncompensated side effects or
consequences of defects. However, the financial
impact on the customer who encounters a
failure is just as important. For example, the
customer’s lost productivity, lost data, and
potential loss of reputation in the marketplace
must be acknowledged and accounted
for. Beyond the impact on the customer, lowquality
software can also impact the public and
the environment. Software engineers should
seek the optimal CoSQ — the minimal total
cost for a specified quality level.
1.3. Standards, Models, and Certifications
[1*, c4] [7, c24s24.2]
Sound use of software engineering software
standards and software process assessment
and improvement improves software quality.
One of the key general software engineering
standards is ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207:2017,
which describes the software life cycle processes.
Foremost, software engineers should
know the key software engineering standards
that apply to their specific industry. As
Iberle discussed [19], the practices software
engineers use vary greatly depending on the
industry, business model and organizational
culture where they work. For example, IEEE
1228:1994 Standard for Software Safety Plans
and IEEE 1633:2016 Recommended Practice
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-5
on Software Reliability target industries
where safety and reliability are important.
The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) paradigms
differ from standards in that it often
proposes “best practices” for software engineers
from a specific perspective. (Refer to the
Software Engineering Process KA for more
information about the PDCA paradigm for
software.)
Other industry “best practices” models such
as the Control Objectives for Information and
Related Technologies (COBIT) for information
technology governance [27], the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®)
for project management [25], the Business
Analysis Body of Knowledge (BABOK®) [28],
the Capability Maturity Model Integration
(CMMI) [29] and The Open Group
Architecture Framework (TOGAF) propose
software related practices that can improve the
quality of software processes and products [30].
Software organizations can also consider the
possible advantages of obtaining registrations
or certifications (e.g., ISO 9001 for quality
[10], ISO 27001 for security [31], (e.g., ISO
9001 for quality [10], ISO 27001 for security
[31] and ISO 20000 for operations [32]), and
software engineers can also obtain Scrum and
Scaled Agile Framework® (SAFe®) certifications
for Agile processes [22]. The use of these
models and certifications have been shown
to augment stakeholders’ confidence that the
software engineers’ knowledge and skills are
up to date and recognized internationally.
1.4. Software Dependability and Integrity
Levels [1*, c4s4.8, c7s7.3.3] [11]
Software-intensive and safety-critical systems
are those in which a system failure could
harm human life, other living things, physical
structures, or the environment. The software
in these systems is considered safety-critical
and requires the use of systematic methods
and tools to ensure its high level of quality.
A growing number of industries are using
increasing numbers of safety-critical software,
including transportation systems, chemical
and nuclear plants, and medical devices.
Software failure in these systems could have
catastrophic effects. Engineers use industry
standards, such as software considerations in
airborne systems and equipment certification
DO-178C [8] and railway applications EN
50128 [18], and emerging processes, tools,
and techniques to develop safety-critical software
more safely. These standards, tools and
techniques reduce the risk of injecting faults
into the software and thus improve software
availability, reliability, and maintainability.
Software engineers and their managers must
understand the threats and issues and develop
the skills needed to anticipate and prevent
accidents before they occur [15].
Safety-critical software can be categorized
as direct or indirect. Direct software is
embedded in a safety-critical system, such as
an aircraft’s flight control computer. Indirect
software includes software applications used
to develop safety-critical software. Indirect
software is included in software engineering
environments and software test environments.
Three complementary techniques for
reducing failure risk are avoidance, detection
and removal, and damage limitation.
These techniques impact software functional
requirements, performance requirements and
development processes. Increasing risk implies
increasing SQA and more rigorous review
techniques such as inspections [16]. Higher risk
levels might necessitate more thorough inspections
of requirements, design, and code, or the
use of more formal verification and validation
techniques. Another technique for managing
and controlling software risk is building
assurance cases. An assurance case is a reasoned,
auditable artifact created to support the contention
that its claim or claims are satisfied.
It contains the following relationships: one or
more claims about properties, arguments that
logically link the evidence and any assumptions
to the claims, and a body of evidence and
assumptions supporting these arguments [9].
1.4.1. Dependability [7, c10]
In cases where system failure may have severe
consequences, overall dependability (e.g.,
12-6 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
hardware, software, and human or operational
dependability) is the main quality
requirement, aside from basic software functionality,
for the following reasons: System
failures affect many people; users often reject
systems that are unreliable, unsafe, or insecure;
system failure costs could be important;
and undependable systems might cause information
loss. Many standards address different
perspectives of dependability, such as
reliability and availability. System and software
dependability regroups several related
quality characteristics: availability, reliability,
maintainability and supportability, safety and
security [21]. When developing dependable
software, engineers can apply tools and techniques
to reduce the risk of injecting faults into
the intermediate deliverables or the final software
product. They can use static, dynamic, or
formal methods for verification and validation
(V&V), and testing processes, as well as other
specialized techniques, methods, and tools to
identify defects that affect dependability as
early as possible in the software life cycle [7*,
c10.5]. Additionally, they may have to incorporate
specific mechanisms into the software
to guard against external attacks and to tolerate
faults during its operation.
1.4.2. Integrity Levels of Software
[1*, c4s4.8, c7s7.3.2] [11]
Defining integrity levels is a method of risk
management. An integrity level is “a value representing
project-unique characteristics (e.g.,
complexity, criticality, risk, safety level, security
level, desired performance, and reliability)
that define the importance of the system,
software, or hardware to the user” [11]. The
characteristics used to determine software
integrity level vary depending on the intended
application and use of the system. The software
is a part of the system, and its integrity
level is determined as a part of that system.
The assigned software integrity levels
might change as the software evolves. Design,
coding, procedural and technology features
implemented in the system or software can
raise or lower the assigned software integrity
levels. The software integrity levels established
for a project result from agreements
among the acquirer, supplier, developer, and
independent assurance authorities. A software
integrity level scheme is used to determine software
integrity levels [11].
Software engineers should know that in
certain safety-critical industries, such as
avionics, railways, nuclear power, medical
devices and many others, industry-specific
guidance can require a certain level of independence
for software quality activities and
can assign minimum V&V techniques to
be used by integrity level (example of such
techniques are: usability analysis, algorithm
analysis, boundary value analysis, data flow
analysis, walk-through review [11][26]).
2. Software Quality Management Process
“Software quality management” (SQM) is
concerned with coordinating activities to
direct and control an organization with regard
to software quality” [6]. The purpose of the
Quality Management process is to assure that
products, services, and implementations of
the quality management process meet organizational
and project quality objectives and
achieve customer satisfaction.
Software engineers can learn about the
SQM process in the many software engineering
standards, models, and certifications
available and used widely in the industry.
An important concept of SQM is the design
and upkeeping of a Quality Management
System (QMS). As proposed by ISO90003
[26] which interprets ISO9001 concepts for
the software industry.
QMS defines processes, process owners,
requirements for the processes, measurements
of the processes and their outputs, and feedback
channels throughout the whole software
life cycle. A QMS comprises many key activities:
SQA, V&V, reviews and audits, software
configuration management (SCM), and
requires policies, procedures, and processes
to ensure that everyone involved understands
what is expected in terms of software process
and product quality. For a QMS to be
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-7
effective, management support is imperative.
Management support implies that projects
are trained to the QMS requirement and
have enough resources to achieve the quality
goal defined for it. Management sponsorship
should be solicited frequently during software
project review to ensure software quality
activities are executed and nonconformities
addressed.
For a software project, software quality
processes consist of tasks and techniques to
indicate how software plans (e.g., software
management, development, quality management
or configuration management plans) are
implemented and how well the intermediate
and final products meet their specified requirements.
Results from these tasks are assembled
in reports for management. SQM process
management is tasked with ensuring that the
report results are accurate and acted upon.
Risk management can also play an
important role in delivering quality software.
Incorporating disciplined risk analysis and
management techniques into the software
life cycle processes can help improve product
quality. (See the Software Engineering
Management KA for related material on risk
management.)
2.1. Software Quality Improvement
[1*, s9.9 and c9] [2] [3]
Software quality improvement (SQI) is done
using many different approaches within the
software industry, including software process
improvement (SPI), Six Sigma, Lean, and
Kaizen just to name a few. For example, the
SPI activities seek to improve process effectiveness,
efficiency, and other characteristics
to improve software quality. For example,
although SPI could be included in any of the
first three categories, many organizations
organize SPI into a separate category that
might span many projects.
Software product quality can be improved
using Lean principles as well as an iterative
process of continual improvement, which
includes management control, coordination of
activities, and feedback from many concurrent
processes: (1) the process of improving the
software life cycle processes; (2) the process
of fault/defect categorization, detection,
removal, and prevention; and (3) a personal
improvement process.
The theory and concepts behind quality
improvement — such as building quality
through the prevention and early detection of
defects, continual improvement, and stakeholder
focus — are also pertinent to software
engineering. These concepts are based on the
work of experts in quality who have stated
that a product’s quality is directly linked to
the quality of the process used to create it.
Improvement models such as the Plan-Do-
Check-Act (PDCA) improvement cycle, evolutionary
delivery, Kaizen, and techniques
like quality function deployment (QFD) offer
ways to specify quality objectives and determine
whether they are met.
Finally, since software engineering is a
complex process, it cannot be reduced to a
cookbook of procedures. To complement the
process and tools improvement movement,
Humphrey proposed the personal software
process (PSP) for software engineers to also
assess their skills and knowledge constantly
and continually improve them as well.
2.2. Plan Quality Management [1*, c13]
Software quality planning includes determining
which quality standards and models are to be
used, defining specific quality goals, estimating
the effort to be used to achieve each goal; and
deciding at what milestone the software quality
activity should take place. In some cases, software
quality planning also includes defining
the software quality processes to be used.
First, the software organization must
commit to quality by establishing their quality
management system (QMS) which includes
quality management policies, objectives, and
procedures. This requires that the responsibility
and authority for implementing the
QMS are assigned and that they are independent
of current project management teams.
An approved organizational policy, about
software quality, helps in guiding projects
12-8 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
and products development decisions as well
as behavior of personnel. Software engineers
should promote the use of graphically represented
processes and procedures that implement
the quality policy and explain the roles,
activities to be executed and the expected
results of key software engineering activities.
Consequently, for a QMS to be used
in improvement its processes should be documented
with its user in mind and identify
where quality controls are to be verified.
Finally, procedures explain in detail what
steps are taken to execute a specific activity.
2.3. Evaluate Quality Management
Once the QMS is in place, the ISO/IEC
Technical Specification TS 33061:2021 [23]
Standard defines a process assessment model
for software life cycle processes using five process
capabilities levels (from level 0: incomplete
to level 5: optimizing process). Additionally,
software engineers can assess the maturity of
their QMS activities in their software projects
using the IEEE 730:2014 Standard guidance
[6]. Management sponsorship supports process
and product evaluations. The evaluation
findings feed into an improvement program
for identifying detailed actions and improvement
projects to be addressed in a feasible
time frame. Periodically, the software engineers
will gather and analyze quality assurance
evaluation results. This can be achieved
by looking at quality measures and defect
characterization produced by the projects.
2.3.1. Software Quality Measurement
[1*, c10] [7, c24s24.5]
Software quality measurements are used
to support decision-making. With the
increasing sophistication of software, quality
questions go beyond whether the software
works to how well it achieves measurable
quality goals. Quantifying some attribute
of software can help engineers evaluate its
quality or the quality of its process. (Process
measurement is described in detail in the
Process KA.)
Software quality measurement helps engineers
make determinations about software
quality (because models of software
product quality include measures to determine
the degree to which the software product
achieves quality goals); managerial questions
about effort, cost, and schedule; when to stop
testing and release a product (see Test-Related
Measures in the Software Testing KA); and
the efficacy of process improvement efforts.
The CoSQ assurance activities are an issue
frequently raised in deciding how a project
or a software development and maintenance
organization should be organized. Often,
generic models of cost are used; these models
are based on when a defect is found and how
much effort it takes to fix the defect relative
to finding the defect earlier in development.
Software quality measurement data
collected internally may offer a better picture
of cost within the project or organization.
Although the software quality measurement
data may be useful by itself (e.g., the number
of defective requirements or the proportion
of defective requirements), mathematical
and graphical techniques can help project
stakeholders interpret the measures. (See
the Engineering Mathematical Foundations
KA.) These techniques include the following:
• Descriptive statistics-based analysis (e.g.,
Pareto analysis, run charts, scatter plots,
normal distribution);
• Statistical tests (e.g., the binomial test,
chi-squared test);
• Trend analysis (e.g., control charts; see
The Quality Toolbox in Further Readings);
• Prediction (e.g., reliability models).
Descriptive statistics-based techniques and
tests often provide a snapshot of the more
troublesome areas of the software product
under examination. The resulting charts and
graphs are visualization aids decision-makers
can use to focus resources and conduct process
improvements where they seem most needed.
Results from trend analysis may indicate that
a schedule is slipping or that certain classes
of faults may become more likely unless some
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-9
corrective action is taken in development. The
predictive techniques help estimate testing
effort and schedule and predict failures. (More
discussion on measurement in general appears
in the Software Engineering Process and
Software Engineering Management KAs.
More specific information on testing measurement
is presented in the Software Testing
KA.) Software quality measurement also
includes measuring defect occurrences and
applying statistical methods to understand
what types of defects occur most frequently.
Three widely used software quality measurements
are error density (number of errors per
unit size of documents/software), defect density
(number of defects found divided by the
size of the software), and failure rate (mean
time to failure). Reliability models are built
from failure data collected during software
testing or from software in service and thus
can be used to estimate the probability of
future failures and assist in decisions about
when to stop testing. This information can
be used in SPI to determine methods to prevent,
reduce or eliminate defect recurrence.
The information also helps engineers understand
trends, how well detection and containment
techniques are working, and how well
the development and maintenance processes
are progressing. They can use these measurement
methods to develop defect profiles for
a specific application domain. Then, for the
next software project within that organization,
the profiles can be used to guide the
SQM processes — that is, to focus effort
on where problems are most likely to occur.
Similarly, benchmarks, or defect counts typical
of that domain, may help engineers determine
when the product is ready for delivery.
(Discussion about using measurement data to
improve development and maintenance processes
appears in the Software Engineering
Management and Software Engineering
Process KAs.)
2.4. Perform Corrective and Preventive Actions
It is important that when quality management
objectives are not met, corrective actions
be documented and submitted so that the
QMS be improved to prevent problem from
reoccurring in future software projects. This
requires that project participants have a way
of reporting software engineering process
and tools problems to an independent organization
that will document and monitor the
progress of the corrective actions and inform
the relevant stakeholders.
2.4.1. Defect Characterization [1*, c1s3]
To help in the elimination of the cause or
causes of an existing nonconformity or undesirable
situation to prevent recurrence, software
engineers can use software quality
control (SQC) techniques to find errors,
defects, and failures in their processes and
products. When tracking errors, defects and
failures, the software engineer is interested in
the number and types of incidents. Numbers
alone, without classification, might be insufficient
to help in identifying the underlying
causes and thus to prevent them in the future.
Therefore, software engineers should establish
a meaningful defect classification taxonomy to
describe and categorize such anomalies. One
probable action resulting from peer reviews
and testing findings is to remove these errors
and defects early from the work product under
examination.
Other SQM activities attempt to eliminate
their causes (e.g., root cause analysis (RCA)).
RCA activities include analyzing and summarizing
the findings to find root causes and
using measurement techniques to improve the
software engineering processes, techniques
and tools. (Process improvement is primarily
discussed in the Software Engineering
Process KA. RCA is further discussed in the
Engineering Foundations KA.)
Data on errors and defects found during
SQA and control techniques may be lost
unless they are recorded. For some techniques
(e.g., peer reviews and inspections), software
engineers are present to record such data and
to address issues and make decisions. In addition,
when automated tools are used (see Topic
4, Software Quality Tools), the tool output
12-10 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
may provide defect trends reports that can be
provided to the organization’s management.
3. Software Quality Assurance Process
3.1. Prepare for Quality Assurance
[1*, c1s1.5, c4s4.6] [6]
Software quality assurance (SQA) is defined as
“a set of activities that define and assess the
adequacy of software processes to provide evidence
that establishes confidence that the software
processes are appropriate for and produce
software products of suitable quality for their
intended purposes.” To correct a common
misunderstanding, SQA is not only testing of
a software. A key attribute of SQA, in critical
systems, is the objectivity of the SQA function
concerning the quality of a software product.
In this case, the SQA function might also be
organizationally independent of the project;
that is, free from technical, managerial, and
financial pressures [6]. SQA has two aspects:
product assurance and process assurance,
which are introduced in Section 2.3.
The software quality plan (in some industry
sectors, it is termed the software quality
assurance plan (SQAP)) defines the activities
and tasks used to ensure that software developed
for a specific product satisfies the project’s
established requirements and user needs
within project cost and schedule constraints
and is commensurate with project risks. The
SQAP first ensures that quality targets are
clearly defined and understood.
The SQAP’s quality activities and tasks
are specified, along with their costs, resource
requirements, objectives, and schedule in
relation to related objectives, in the software
engineering management, software development
and software maintenance plans. The
SQAP identifies documents, standards, practices,
and conventions governing the project
and how these items are checked and monitored
to ensure adequacy and compliance.
The SQAP also identifies measures; statistical
techniques; procedures for problem reporting
and corrective action; resources such as tools,
techniques, and methodologies; security for
physical media; training; and SQA reporting
and documentation. Moreover, the SQAP
addresses the SQA activities of any other type
of activity described in the software plans —
such as procurement of supplier software for
the project, commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
software installation and service after software
delivery. It can also contain acceptance
criteria and reporting and management activities
that are critical to software quality. The
SQA plan should not conflict with the software
configuration management plan or any
other relevant project plannning artifact.
More over they should be considered complimentary
activities (for process SQAP the
SCM Process Audit and the Testing activities
for SCM Functional Audit).
Software quality encompasses several perspectives:
the software process quality, the
software end-product quality and the software
work products (also called intermediary
products) quality. The next sections cover each
perspective of software quality knowledge a
software engineer must have.
3.2. Perform Process Assurance
[1*, c3s3.2–s3.3, c4s4.6.1.3, c8, c9] [7, c25]
Crosby [2] and Humphrey [3] have demonstrated
that software quality management
(SQM) and software engineering process
quality have a direct effect on the quality of the
final software product. (Models and criteria
that evaluate and improve the capabilities of
software organizations are primarily project
organization and management considerations
and, as such, are covered in the Software
Engineering Management and Software
Engineering Process KAs.) International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9001
[10] proposes another process quality perspective,
where a management system that oversees
the processes’ actors, activities, controls,
input, and outputs ensures the quality of outputs
(e.g., work products and final product). A
management system is defined as a “set of interrelated
or interacting elements of an organization
to establish policies and objectives,
and processes to achieve those objectives”
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-11
[10]. This perspective requires software engineering
organizations to take the time to
describe their policies, processes, and procedures
with enough detail that software engineer
roles and responsibilities are clear during
life cycle activities (as detailed in the Software
Engineering Process KA).
SQA activities, listed in the IEEE 730:2014
Standard [6], describe the many quality assurance
activities that should be conducted early
in a software project’s life cycle to ensure
quality. Software engineers should be aware
of the need to plan and execute SQA activities
at certain project milestones and keep
records of their execution. These activities
consist of document and code reviews as well
as verification and validation (V&V) activities,
including testing (as detailed in Section
3.4 of this KA), which evaluate the output of
a process’s compliance with its requirements
and specifications.
Finally, software configuration management
(SCM) is an important activity to
ensure the quality of work products and software.
Configuration management is defined as
the “discipline applying technical and administrative
direction and surveillance to:
• identify and document the functional
and physical characteristics of a configuration
item;
• control changes to those characteristics;
• record and report change processing and
implementation status;
• verify compliance with specified
requirements.”
Software engineers should identify which
work products and software artifacts require
configuration management. In addition, they
should be familiar with source code versioning
processes, which involve keeping
track of baselined and incremental versions of
the software and ensuring that changes different
developers make do not interfere with
one another, and they should know how to
operate the version control tool kit. (Refer
to the Software Configuration Management
KA for more information about this process.)
3.3. Perform Product Assurance
[1*, s3.2–s3.3] [7, c4, s4.6.1.2]
First, the software engineer must determine
the real purpose of the software to be designed
and constructed. Stakeholder requirements are
paramount here. They include quality requirements
(called Quality of Service Constraints in
the Software Requirements KA) and functional
requirements. Thus, software engineers
are responsible for eliciting quality requirements
that might not be explicit at the outset
and for understanding their importance and
the difficulty in defining them, measuring
them, and establishing them for final acceptance.
Software engineers should understand
how to define quality requirements as well as
their quality targets to ensure they can effectively
be measured at the acceptance stage
of the project. During the project planning,
software engineers must keep these quality
requirements in mind. They must also anticipate
potential additional development costs if
attributes such as safety, security and dependability
are important.
An international standard on what constitutes
a software product’s many measurable
quality characteristics was reached and
is described in ISO/IEC 25010:2011 [4]. This
standard proposes several software product
quality models, consisting of characteristics
and sub-characteristics, for software product
quality and software quality in use. Another
is IEEE 982.1:2005 Standard Dictionary
of Measures to Produce Reliable Software.
These software characteristics are commonly
called product quality requirements, which are
nonfunctional software requirements [7*,
c4,s4.6.1.2]. Software engineers should know
the many software characteristics that can be
planned, implemented, and measured during
software construction (e.g., functional suitability,
performance efficiency, compatibility,
usability, reliability, security, maintainability,
and portability). Software engineers should
also know that certain quality characteristics
have conflicting impacts. For example,
trying to augment the security characteristic
by encrypting data might adversely affect the
12-12 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
performance characteristic. This international
standard also proposes a general data quality
model that focuses on data quality as part of
a computer system and defines quality characteristics
for target data used by humans
and systems.
Another software product quality perspective
is the quality of work products. The term
work product means any artifact resulting from
a process used to create the final software
product. Work products include system/subsystem
specifications, software requirements
specifications for a system’s software components,
software design descriptions, source
code, software test documentation and test
reports. Sound engineering practice requires
that intermediate work products relevant to
quality be evaluated using work product reviews
and inspections (discussed later in this chapter)
throughout the software engineering process.
3.4. V&V and Testing [1*, c7] [11]
Verification ensures that the product is built
correctly in that the output products of a life
cycle phase meet the specifications imposed
on them in previous phases. Verification is
defined as “the process of evaluating a system
or component to determine whether the products
of a given development phase satisfy the
conditions imposed at the start of that phase”
[11]. Alternatively, validation ensures that the
right product is built — the product fulfills its
specific intended purpose. It is defined as “the
process of evaluating a system or component
during or at the end of the development process
to determine whether it satisfies specified
requirements.”
The purpose of V&V is to help the development
organization build quality into the
software throughout the development life
cycle. V&V includes software testing tasks.
Software testing is a necessary activity to
ensure product quality. However, in most
cases, software testing is insufficient to
establish confidence that the software fits
its intended use. V&V tasks listed in IEEE
Standard 1012:2016 [11] objectively assess
products and processes throughout the life
cycle. This assessment demonstrates whether
the requirements are correct, complete, accurate,
consistent, and testable. The verification
process and the validation process should
begin early in development or maintenance.
This prevents defects late in the life cycle,
which would incur rework and significantly
increase costs. Software engineers should
identify the product integrity level and ensure
the minimum V&V tasks are assigned for key
product features concerning both the product’s
immediate predecessor and the planned specifications.
Optional V&V tasks are also listed
and can improve software product quality.
Keeping a record of the traceability among
software work products can help augment
the quality of the V&V activities. Traceability
is defined as the “ability to trace the history,
application or location of an object” [14].
Early planning of V&V activities ensures
that each resource, role, and responsibility
is clearly assigned. The resulting V&V plan
documents the various resources and their
roles and SQA activities, as well as the
techniques and tools to be used. Software
engineers should choose and apply the
proper V&V task depending on the software
integrity level. (Refer to Section 1.4.2)
V&V can also be executed by an independent
organization for very critical software.
Independent verification and validation
(IV&V) are defined as “V&V performed by
an organization that is technically, managerially,
and financially independent of the
development organization” [11].
Software V&V tasks can be sorted into
static, dynamic and formal tasks [20].
Dynamic techniques involve executing the
software; static techniques involve analyzing
documents and source code but not executing
the software; formal techniques use mathematics
and formal specification languages.
It should be noted that there are no strong
boundaries between "Static analysis techniques",
"Dynamic analysis techniques" and
"Formal analysis techniques". For example,
static and dynamic analysis techniques usually
have a strong formal background such as
data-flow analysis or model checking.
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-13
3.4.1. Static Analysis Techniques
Static analysis techniques directly analyze
a work product’s content and structure
(including requirements, interface specifications,
designs, and models) without executing
the software. The only way to detect non-executable
code is through static analysis as no
dynamic test can verify that. Static techniques
can be executed manually or with the help of a
tool. Tools and techniques for statically examining
software work can help software engineers
in this task. For example, code reading,
peer review of a work product, and static analysis
of source code control flow are considered
static techniques because they do not involve
executing the software code.
We will see, in section 3.4.5 that review
and audit processes are consideredstatic analysis
activities, meaning that no software or
models are executed. Instead, they examine
software engineering artifacts (also called
intermediary or work products) concerning
standards established by the organization or
project for those artifacts.
3.4.2. Dynamic Analysis Techniques
Dynamic analysis techniques involve executing
or simulating the software code, looking
for errors and defects. Different dynamic
techniques are performed throughout software
development, maintenance, and operation.
Generally, these are testing techniques,
but simulation, model analysis and model
checking are considered dynamic analysis
techniques. (See the Software Engineering
Models and Methods KA.) “In addition, black
box testing is considered a dynamic analysis
technique, as the software engineer analyzes
the output received following the entry of
inputs.” (See the Software Testing KA.)
3.4.3. Formal Analysis Techniques
[7*, c10s10.5]
Formal analysis techniques (also called formal
methods) are “mathematical approaches to
software development where you define a
formal model of the software. You may then
formally analyze this model to search for
errors and inconsistencies” [7*, c10s10.5].
Sometimes, the software requirements may
be written using a more formal specification
language known as formal methods. They are
notably used to verify software requirements
and designs. They have mostly been used to
verify crucial parts of critical systems, such
as specific security and safety requirements.
(See also Formal Methods in the Software
Engineering Models and Methods KA.)
Different groups may perform testing during
software development, including groups
independent of the development team. The
Software Testing KA is devoted entirely to
this subject.
3.4.4. Software Quality Control and Testing
[1*, c7s7.10]
Testing is considered an important product
quality control activity part of a software
development project’s V&V processes.
Quality Control is “a set of activities that
measure, evaluate and report on the quality
of software project artifacts throughout the
project life cycle” [25]. Software testing is an
important quality control activity to ensure
software quality. Software testing is one of
many verification activities that confirm that
software development output meets input
requirements. IEEE 730:2014 [6] lists the
many testing and retesting activities software
engineers should plan, execute, and record. It
also recommends that testing completion criteria
be set. Software engineers should plan
the testing activities, including levels, techniques,
measures, and tools. Software quality
engineering team, for critical systems, should
particularly be involved in qualifying software
products prior to its delivery (i) either for further
integration or (ii) for operations in target
computing environment; as an independent
test and evaluation activity, without involving
development team members in the process.
(Refer to the Testing KA for details about the
knowledge software engineers should have
about software testing.)
12-14 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
3.4.5. Technical Reviews and Audits
[1*, c5, c6] [23, s4, s5]
We have seen SQC techniques for assessing
the quality of the software in section 2.4.1.
For the other artefacts, product quality control
is assessed using reviews and inspections
of these work products. These SQC activities
are planned and executed during development,
maintenance, and operations activities
[17]. Peer reviews are defined as “the review
of work products performed by peers during
development of the work products to identify
defects for removal” [14]. For example, during
software development, a code review (often
done by using a pull request technique/tool)
occurs when a peer reviews the code, often at
the software developer’s request, before it can
be merged into a project.
Reviews are valuable because they can identify
issues early in development or even before
a component is designed. Fixing a defect in a
component that has been coded is much more
expensive than catching it beforehand.
Different types of work product reviews (e.g.,
formal, and informal) are distinguished by purpose,
level of independence, tools and techniques
used, roles involved, and by the subject
of the activity. Reviews play important roles in
software quality, in SCM, and in the sharing
of knowledge among colleagues. However,
these different roles share a single purpose —
to ensure the quality of the delivered products.
Reviews should be part of the software engineering
culture and should be planned, executed,
and documented during the software life
cycle. In Agile life cycles, pair programming
invites continuous reviews. Different review
types for work products are described in the
ISO/IEC 20246:2017 Standard [12]:
• Ad hoc reviews — unstructured reviews
where each reviewer is expected to find as
many defects as possible of any type;
• Checklist-based reviews — systematic
reviews identifying issues based on
checklists;
• Scenario-based reviews — reviews where
reviewers are provided with structured
guidelines on how to read through the
work product under review;
• Perspective-based reviews — reviews
where reviewers take on different stakeholder
viewpoints and review the work
product from that stakeholder’s viewpoint;
and
• Role-based reviews — reviews in which
the reviewer evaluates the work product
from the perspective of various stakeholder
roles, which might differ from
their daily role.
Audits are more formal activities that are
often mandated to be performed by third
parties to ensure independence. In mature
organizations, technical reviews and audits
are fully integrated with the overall project
plans. Therefore, technical reviews and audits
should be planned, approved, and conducted.
Although a project audit often addresses the
whole project’s current state, technical reviews
can also be more focused and address a specific
project phase [24]. System requirements
reviews help ensure that the level of understanding
of top-level system requirements is
adequate to support further requirements analysis
and design activities and that the system
can proceed into initial system design with
acceptable risk; System functional or preliminary
design reviews help ensure that the
system under review can proceed into preliminary
or detailed design with acceptable risk and
that all system requirements and functional
performance requirements derived from the
approved preliminary system specification are
defined and consistent with the project budget,
program schedule, risk, and other program and
system constraints; Preliminary design reviews
help ensure that the preliminary design for
the system under review is sufficiently mature
and ready to proceed into detailed design and
can meet the stated performance requirements
within program budget, schedule, risk and
other program and system constraints; Test
readiness reviews assess test objectives, test
methods and procedures, test scope, safety,
readiness for the project test and evaluation,
and whether test resources have been properly
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-15
identified and obtained; Production readiness
reviews ascertain that the system design
is ready for production and that the project has
accomplished adequate production planning
for entering production.
4. Software Quality Tools
[1*, c3s3.2.3, c7s7.8.1, c7s7.11]
Software tools improve software quality.
Simple tools can be forms and checklists (e.g.,
a requirements traceability matrix or a code
review checklist). But automated tools can also
be of great help to improve software efficiency
and quality. Examples of automated tools are
tools that allow code versioning/branching (e.g.,
Git) and pull requests for code review. DevOps
tools in services/scripts like on-demand environments,
continuous integration/continuous
delivery (CI/CD), code quality assessment, and
automated testing are important contributors to
software quality. (See the Software Operations
KA discussion about tools.)
T﻿hese tools are known as static and dynamic
analysis tools. Static analysis tools input source
code, perform syntactical and semantic analysis
without executing the code, and present
results to users. There is a large variety in the
depth, thoroughness and scope of static analysis
tools that can be applied to artifacts,
including models, and source code. (See the
Software Construction, Software Testing,
and Software Maintenance KAs for descriptions
of dynamic analysis tools.) Categories of
static analysis tools include the following:
• Tools that facilitate and partially automate
reviews and inspections of documents
and code. These tools can route
work to different participants to partially
automate and control the review process.
In addition, they allow users to enter
defects found during inspections and
reviews for later removal;
• Tools that help organizations perform
software safety hazard analysis. These
tools provide, for example, automated support
for failure mode and effects analysis
(FMEA) and fault tree analysis (FTA);
• Tools that support tracking of software
problems. These tools enable entry of
anomalies discovered during software
testing and subsequent analysis, disposition,
and resolution. Some tools include
support for workflow and for tracking
problem resolution status; and
• Tools that analyze data captured from
software engineering environments and
software test environments and produce
visual displays of quantified data
in graphs, charts, and tables. These tools
sometimes include the functionality to
perform statistical analysis on data sets
(to discern trends and make forecasts).
Some of these tools provide defect injection
and removal rates, defect densities,
yields, and distribution of defect injection
and removal for each life cycle phase.
MATRIX OF TOPICS VS. REFERENCE MATERIAL
Topic
Laporte and
April 2018 [1*]
Sommerville
2016 [7*]
IEEE Software
Code of
Ethics [5*]
Wiegers
2013 [13*]
1. Software Quality Fundamentals
1.1. Software Engineering Culture
and Ethics
Ch. 1s1.6, Ch. 2s3 X
1.2. Value and Cost of Quality Ch. 2s2.2
12-16 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
1.3. Standards, Models and
Certifications
Ch. 4 Ch. 24s24.2
1.4. Software Dependability and
Integrity Levels
Ch. 4s4.8
Ch. 7s7.2-7.3
Ch. 10
2. Software Quality
Management Process
2.1. Software Quality Improvement Ch. 9s9.9
2.2. Plan Quality Management
2.3. Evaluate Quality Management Ch. 10 Ch. 24s24.5
2.4. Perform Corrective and
Preventive Actions
Ch. 1,s3
3. Software Quality
Assurance Process
3.1. Prepare for Quality Assurance Ch. 1s1.5, Ch. 4s4.6 Ch. 14
3.2. Perform Process Assurance Ch. 3s3.2-s3.3
Ch. 8, Ch. 9,
Ch. 4s4.6.1.3
Ch. 25
3.3. Perform Product Assurance Ch. 3s3.2-3.3
Ch. 7, Ch. 5,
Ch. 4s4.6.1.2
Ch. 4s4.1.2
3.4. Verification & Validation
and Tests
Ch. 5, Ch. 6, Ch. 7 Ch. 10s10.5
4. Software Quality Tools Ch. 3s3.2.3, Ch.
7s7.8.1, Ch. 7s7.11
X
FURTHER READINGS
IEEE 730-2014, “IEEE Standard for Software
Quality Assurance Processes,” 2014 [6].
Requirements for initiating, planning, controlling,
and executing the Software Quality
Assurance processes of a software development
or maintenance project are established
in this standard.
IEEE Std 1012-2016, “IEEE Standard for
System, Software, and Hardware Verification
and Validation,” 2016 [11].
Verification and validation (V&V) processes
are used to determine whether the
development products of a given activity
conform to that activity’s requirements and
whether the product satisfies its intended
use and user needs. V&V life cycle process
requirements are specified for different integrity
levels.
ISO/IEC Std 20246-2017, “Software and
Systems Engineering — Work Product
Reviews,” 2017 [12].
This international standard establishes a
generic framework for work product reviews
that can be referenced and used by all organizations
involved in the management, development,
testing and maintenance of systems
and software.
SOFTWARE QUALITY 12-17
N. Leveson, Safeware: System Safety and
Computers [15].
This book describes the importance of software
safety practices and how these practices
can be incorporated into software development
projects.
T. Gilb and D. Graham, Software Inspection [16].
This book introduces measurement and statistical
sampling for reviews and defects. It
presents techniques that produce quantified
results for reducing defects, improving
productivity, tracking projects and creating
documentation.
K. E. Wiegers, Peer Reviews in Software: A
Practical Guide [17*].
This book provides clear, succinct explanations
of different peer review methods
distinguished by level of formality and effectiveness.
It provides pragmatic guidance for
implementing the methods and for determining
which methods are appropriate for
given circumstances.
REFERENCES
[1*] C.Y. Laporte and A. April, Software
Quality Assurance, IEEE Press, 2018.
[2] P.B. Crosby, Quality Is Free, McGraw-
Hill, 1979.
[3] W. Humphrey, Managing the Software
Process, Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[4] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 25010:2011
Systems and Software Engineering
— Systems and Software Quality
Requirements and Evaluation
(SQuaRE) — Systems and Software
Quality Models,” ed., 2011.
[5*] IEEE CS/ACM Joint Task Force on
Software Engineering Ethics and
Professional Practices, “Software
Engineering Code of Ethics and
Professional Practice https://www
.computer.org/education/code-of
-ethics.
[6] IEEE, “IEEE 730 Standard for
Software Quality Assurance
Processes,” ed., IEEE, 2014.
[7*] I. Sommerville, Software Engineering,
10th ed., New York: Addison-
Wesley, 2016.
[8] RTCA, “DO-178C, Software
Considerations in Airborne Systems
and Equipment Certification,” ed.,
5 January 2012. Also known as
ED-12C in EUROCAE.
[9] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 15026-1:2019
Systems and Software Engineering —
Systems and Software Assurance —
Part 1: Concepts and Vocabulary,” ed.,
ISO/IEC, 2019.
[10] “ISO 9001:2015 Quality Management
Systems — Requirements,” ed.,
ISO, 2015.
[11] IEEE, “IEEE Std. 1012:2016,
Standard for System and Software
Verification and Validation,”
IEEE, 2016.
[12] ISO/IEC 20246:2017, “Software and
systems engineering — Work product
reviews,” ed., 2017.
[13*] K.E. Wiegers, Software Requirements,
3rd ed., Redmond, WA: Microsoft
Press, 2013.
[14] ISO/IEC/IEEE, “ISO/IEC/IEEE
24765:2017 Systems and Software
Engineering — Vocabulary,”
2nd ed. 2017.
[15] N. Leveson, Safeware: System Safety
12-18 SWEBOK® GUIDE V4.0
and Computers, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1995.
[16] T. Gilb and D. Graham, Software
Inspection, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1993.
[17*] K. Wiegers, Peer Reviews in Software:
A Practical Guide, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2001.
[18] BS EN 50128:2011+A2:2020,
“Standard for Railway Applications
– Communications, Signaling and
Processing Systems – Software for
Railway Control and Protection
Systems,” British-Adopted European
Standard, 10 August 2020.
[19] K. Iberle, They don’t care about quality,
proceedings of STAR East, Orlando,
United States, 2013, available at
https://kiberle.com/publications/.
[20] D. Wallace, L. M. Ippolito, and
B.B. Cuthill, Reference Information
for the Software Verification and
Validation Process, National Institute
of Standards and Technology
(NIST), U.D. Department of
Commerce, Special Publication
500-234, 1996.
[21] IEC 60300-1:2014, “Dependability
Management — Part 1: Guidance for
Management and Application,” version
3, 25 September 2014.
[22] D. Leffingwell, Safe 4.5 Reference
Guide: Scaled Agile Framework For
Lean Enterprises, 2nd ed., New-York,
Addison-Wesley, 2018.
[23] ISO/IEC TS 33061:2021,
“Information technology — Process
assessment — Process Assessment
Model for Software Life Cycle
Processes,” 2021-04.
[24] IEEE Std 15288.2:2014, “IEEE
Standard for Technical Reviews and
Audits on Defense Programs.”
[25] A guide to the Project management
Body of Knowledge, 7th edition, PMI,
2021, 368p.
[26] ISO/IEC/IEEE 90003:2018,
“Guidelines for the application of
ISO 9001:2015 to computer software”,
2018-11.
[27] COBIT, “Control Objectives for
Information Technology”, version
2019, ISACA and the IT Governance
Institute.
[28] BABOK, “A guide to the Business
Analysis Body of Knowledge”, version
3, International Institute of Business
Analysis, 04-2015.
[29] CMMI, “Capability Maturity Model
Integration”, version 10, ISACA, 2023.
[30] TOGAF, “Open Group Architecture
Framework”, version 10, 04-2022.
[31] ISO/IEC 27001:2022, “Information
security, cybersecurity, and privacy
protection Information
security —management systems